Ailsa Hogben
reflection lab 1

Awad distinguishes between different types of AI depending on their inputs, how they comprehend and manipulate those inputs, and the outputs they produce. For example, the article makes the distinction between 3 types of AI with differing outputs, including making predictions, noticing patterns, and creating new data. Awad also classifies different types of AI by their purpose. The article mentions explainable AI, which is meant to explain obscure processes, and privacy-aware AI, which focuses on keeping data secure. These classifications are important to scientific research because different areas of research require different types of experiments, and understanding which type of AI is best suited for a field or experiment is key in  maximizing the utility of the different types of AI. 

Awad does not make a clear distinction between AI as a tool and AI as a scientific collaborator, and the two often blend together when used in any phase of the scientific process. For example, RAG is first mentioned as an AI tool in which generative AI models access a detailed dataset to answer specific questions. In the beginning it is thought of as a tool for researchers to use when asking questions, but it's later mentioned that it’s also being used in some research to generate hypotheses. Here the line between AI as a tool and a scientific collaborator blurs, suggesting a shift in how science is conducted. Although hypothesis generation is an extension of an existing method, this is just the beginning of integrating AI into scientific research. AI is currently impacting nearly every phase of the scientific method in some field, and suggests that it could completely change the way we conduct research and experiments. 

One limitation of using AI in scientific research is that the data that a model is trained on impacts the model’s output, and that bias in the initial data will show through in later output. This means that models trained on inaccurate or biased information could skew experiments and findings, showing that complete reliance on AI in science is dangerous. Another risk of AI in science is that sensitive information used as training data may be leaked by the AI model, showing the human risk of using AI in research.  

Awad believes that AI is not just accelerating scientific discovery, but also transforming how it's conducted. The article mentions many examples of how AI has been used to automate various parts of the scientific method, suggesting that scientific discovery is being accelerated. However overall it shows that the scientific research process is changing as a whole. Additionally, Awad highlights how AI is expanding the possibilities of our experiments, expanding fields which are difficult or expensive to research, which already partially reshapes our scientific method by allowing us to augment the experimentation and observation steps. This completely strays from our traditional scientific approach, which centers on real life observation. I agree with Awad that scientific research is being reshaped, as all of the types of AI mentioned in the article are growing fields with exponentially growing capabilities, indicating that every aspect of research and experimentation is going to evolve. 